This year, 2008, marks the 150th anniversary of the use of the word
"libertarian" by anarchists.

As is well known, anarchists use the terms _"libertarian"_, _"libertarian
socialist"_ and _"libertarian communist"_ as equivalent to _"anarchist"_ and,
similarly, _"libertarian socialism"_ or _"libertarian communism"_ as an
alternative for _"anarchism."_ This is perfectly understandable, as the
anarchist goal is freedom, liberty, and the ending of all hierarchical and
authoritarian institutions and social relations.

Unfortunately, in the United States the term "libertarian" has become, since
the 1970s, associated with the right-wing, i.e., supporters of "free-market"
capitalism. That defenders of the hierarchy associated with private property
seek to associate the term "libertarian" for [their authoritarian
system](http://anarchism.pageabode.com/anarcho/an-anarchist-critique-of-
anarcho-statism) is both unfortunate and somewhat unbelievable to any genuine
libertarian. Equally unfortunately, thanks to the power of money and the
relative small size of the anarchist movement in America, this appropriation
of the term has become, to a large extent, the default meaning there. Somewhat
ironically, this results in some right-wing "libertarians" complaining that we
genuine libertarians have "stolen" their name in order to associate our
socialist ideas with it!

The facts are somewhat different. As Murray Bookchin noted, _"libertarian"_
was _"a term created by nineteenth-century European anarchists, not by
contemporary American right-wing proprietarians."_ [**The Ecology of
Freedom**, p. 57] While we discuss this issue in [An Anarchist
FAQ](http://www.anarchistfaq.org.uk/) in a few places (most obviously,
[section A.1.3](secA1.html#seca13)) it is useful on the 150th anniversary to
discuss the history of anarchist use of the word "libertarian" to describe our
ideas.

The first anarchist journal to use the term "libertarian" was **La Libertaire,
Journal du Mouvement Social**. Somewhat ironically, given recent developments
in America, it was published in New York between 1858 and 1861 by French
communist-anarchist Joseph Dejacque. The next recorded use of the term was in
Europe, when _"libertarian communism"_ was used at a French regional anarchist
Congress at Le Havre (16-22 November, 1880). January the following year saw a
French manifesto issued on _"Libertarian or Anarchist Communism." _Finally,
1895 saw leading anarchists Sebastien Faure and Louise Michel publish **La
Libertaire** in France. [Max Nettlau, **A Short History of Anarchism**, pp.
75-6, p. 145 and p. 162]

It should be noted that Nettlau's history was first written in 1932 and
revised in 1934. George Woodcock, in his history of anarchism, reported the
same facts as regards Dejacque and Faure [**Anarchism: A History of
libertarian ideas and movements**, p. 233] Significantly, Woodcock's account
was written in 1962 and makes no mention of right-wing use of the term
"libertarian." More recently, Robert Graham states that Dejacque's act made
_"him the first person to use the word 'libertarian' as synonymous with
'anarchist'"_ while Faure and Michel were _"popularising the use of the word
'libertarian' as a synonym for 'anarchist.'"_ [Robert Graham (Ed.),
**Anarchism: A Documentary History of Libertarian Ideas**, p. 60 and p. 231]

Which means, incidentally, that Louise Michel is linked with anarchists both
using the term "libertarian" to describe our ideas **and** with the [black
flag](append2.html) becoming our symbol. Faure subsequently wrote an article
entitled ["Libertarian
Communism"](http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/faure/1903/libertarian-
communism.htm) in 1903.

In terms of America, we find Benjamin Tucker (a leading individualist
anarchist) discussing _"libertarian solutions"_ to land use in February, 1897.
As we discuss in section G.3, the Individualist Anarchists attacked capitalist
(i.e., right-"libertarian") property rights in land as the _"land monopoly"_
and looked forward to a time when _"the libertarian principle to the tenure of
land"_ was actually applied. [**Liberty**, no. 350, p. 5] The 1920s saw
communist-anarchist Bartolomeo Vanzetti argue that:

> _"After all we are socialists as the social-democrats, the socialists, the
communists, and the I.W.W. are all Socialists. The difference - the
fundamental one - between us and all the other is that they are authoritarian
while we are libertarian; they believe in a State or Government of their own;
we believe in no State or Government."_ [Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti,
**The Letters of Sacco and Vanzetti**, p. 274]

Interestingly, Rudolf Rocker's 1949 book, published in Los Angeles, states
that individualist anarchist Stephan P. Andrews was _"one of the most
versatile and significant exponents of libertarian socialism."_ [**Pioneers of
American Freedom**, p. 85] It should also be noted that 1909 saw the
translation into English of Kropotkin's history of the French Revolution in
which he argued that _"the principles of anarchism . . . had their origin . .
. in the deeds of the Great French Revolution"_ and _"the libertarians would
no doubt so the same today."_ [**The Great French Revolution**, vol. 1, p. 204
and p. 206]

The most famous use of _"libertarian communism"_ must be by the world's
largest anarchist movement, the anarcho-syndicalist CNT in Spain. After
proclaiming its aim to be "libertarian communism" in 1919, the CNT held its
national congress of May 1936 in Zaragoza, with 649 delegates representing 982
unions with a membership of over 550,000. One of the resolutions passed was
_["The Confederal Conception of Libertarian
Communism"](http://www.zabalaza.net/pdfs/varpams/libcomm_cnt.pdf)_ [Jose
Peirats, **The CNT in the Spanish Revolution**, vol. 1, pp. 103-10] This was
resolution on libertarian communism was largely the work of Isaac Puente,
author of the widely reprinted and translated [pamphlet of the same
name](http://flag.blackened.net/liberty/libcom.html) published four years
previously. That year, 1932, also saw the founding of the **Federacion Iberica
de Juventudes Libertarias** (_Iberian Federation of Anarchist Youth_) in
Madrid by anarchists.

The term "libertarian" has been used by more people than just anarchists, but
always to describe socialist ideas close to anarchism. For example, in Britain
during the 1960s and 1970s [Maurice
Brinton](http://anarchism.pageabode.com/anarcho/maurice-brinton-for-workers-
power) and the group he was a member of (**Solidarity**) described their
politics as "libertarian" and their decentralised, self-managed form of
socialism is hard to distinguish from anarchism. So while "libertarian" did
become broader than anarchism, it was still used by people on the left who
aimed for socialism.

Unsurprisingly, given this well known and well documented use of the word
"libertarian" by anarchists (and those close to them on the left) to describe
their ideas, the use of the term by supporters of capitalism is deplorable.
And it should be resisted. Writing in the 1980s, Murray Bookchin noted that in
the United States the _"term 'libertarian' itself, to be sure, raises a
problem, notably, the specious identification of an anti-authoritarian
ideology with a straggling movement for 'pure capitalism' and 'free trade.'
This movement never created the word: it appropriated it from the anarchist
movement of the [nineteenth] century. And it should be recovered by those
anti-authoritarians . . . who try to speak for dominated people as a whole,
not for personal egotists who identify freedom with entrepreneurship and
profit."_ Thus anarchists in America should _"restore in practice a tradition
that has been denatured by"_ the free-market right. [**The Modern Crisis**,
pp. 154-5]

As we note in [section F.2](secF2.html), anarchists tend to use an alternative
name for the right-wing "libertarian", namely **_"Propertarian."_**
Interestingly, Ursula Le Guin used the term in her 1974 classic of anarchist
Science-Fiction, **The Dispossessed**. One of the anarchist characters notes
that inhabitants of Anarres (the communist-anarchist moon) _"want nothing to
do with the propertarians"_ of Urras. Urras is, however, a standard capitalist
world (with A-Io representing the United States and Thu representing the
Soviet Union) and not explicitly right-"libertarian" in nature. The anarchist
protagonist, Shevek, does discover some people who describe themselves as
"libertarian" but these declare themselves close to communist-anarchism (asked
whether they are anarchists they reply: _"Partly. Syndicalists, libertarians .
. . anti-centralists"_). Shevek, needless to say, is unimpressed with claims
he should visit Thu to see "socialism", replying that he was well aware how
_"real socialism functions."_ [**The Dispossessed, **p. 70, p. 245 and p. 118]

It should be noted that _"archist"_ and _"propertarian"_ is used pretty much
interchangeably in **The Dispossessed** to describe Urras, showing clear
understand of, and links to, Proudhon's argument in the first self-labelled
anarchist book that property was both _"theft"_ and _"despotism."_ As we noted
in [section F.1](secF1.html), Proudhon argued that _"violates equality by the
rights of exclusion and increase, and freedom by despotism" _and has "_perfect
identity with robbery."_ [**What is Property**, p. 251] Little wonder French
syndicalist Emile Pouget, echoing Proudhon, argued that:

> _"Property and authority are merely differing manifestations and expressions
of one and the same 'principle' which boils down to the enforcement and
enshrinement of the servitude of man. Consequently, the only difference
between them is one of vantage point: viewed from one angle, slavery appears
as a **property crime**, whereas, viewed from a different angle, it
constitutes an **authority crime.**"_ [**No Gods, No Masters**, vol. 2, p. 66]

So, in summary, considered in terms of our political, social and economics
ideas it is unsurprising that anarchists have been using the term
"libertarian" for 150 years. Regardless of the attempts by others ignorant of
both the history of that term and the reality of capitalism to appropriate it
for their hierarchical and authoritarian ideology, we will continue to do so.

This article appeared in **Freedom** vol. 69, No. 23-4

  * [afaq's blog](blogs "Read afaq's latest blog entries." )
  * [![Printer-friendly version](/sites/all/modules/print/icons/print_icon.gif)Printer-friendly version](print/404 "Display a printer-friendly version of this page." )
  *   * [Send by email](printmail/404 "Send this page by email." )

