# J.7 What do anarchists mean by _"social revolution"_?

In anarchist theory, **_"social revolution"_** means far more than just
revolution. For anarchists, a true revolution is far more than just a change
in the political makeup, structure or form of a society. It must transform all
aspects of a society -- political, economic, social, interpersonal
relationships, sexual and so on -- and the individuals who comprise it.
Indeed, these two transformations go hand in hand, complementing each other
and supporting each other \-- individuals, while transforming society,
transform themselves in the process.

As Alexander Berkman put it, _"there are revolutions and revolutions. Some
revolutions change only the governmental form by putting a new set of rulers
in place of the old. These are political revolutions, and as such they are
often meet with little resistance. But a revolution that aims to abolish the
entire system of wage slavery must also do away with the power of one class to
oppress another. That is, it is not any more a mere change of rulers, of
government, not a political revolution, but one that seeks to alter the whole
character of society. That would be a **social** revolution."_ [**ABC of
Anarchism**, p. 34]

It means two related things. Firstly, it means transforming all aspects of
society and not just tinkering with certain aspects of the current system.
Where political revolution means, in essence, changing bosses, social
revolution means changing society. Thus social revolution signifies a change
in the social, economic and cultural and sexual in a libertarian direction, a
transformation in the way society is organised and run. Social revolution, in
other words, does not aim to alter one form of subjection for another, but to
do away with everything that can enslave and oppress the individual. Secondly,
it means bringing about this fundamental change **directly** by the mass of
people in society, rather than relying on political means of achieving this
end, in the style of Marxist-Leninists and other authoritarian socialists. For
anarchists, such an approach is a political revolution only and doomed to
failure. Hence the _"actual, positive work of the social revolution must . . .
be carried out by the toilers themselves, by the labouring people."_
[Alexander Berkman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 45]

That is not to say that an anarchist social revolution is not political in
content -- far from it; it should be obvious to anyone reading this FAQ that
there are considerable political theories at work within anarchism. What we
**are** saying, however, is that anarchists do not seek to seize power and
attempt, through control of law enforcement and the military (in the style of
governments) to bring change about from the top-down. Rather, we seek to bring
change upward from below, and in so doing, make such a revolution inevitable
and not contingent on the machinations of a political vanguard. As Durruti
argued, _"[w]e never believed that the revolution consisted of the seizure of
power by a minority which would impose a dictatorship on the people . . . We
want a revolution by and for the people. Without this no revolution is
possible. It would be a Coup d'Etat, nothing more."_ [quoted by Abel Paz,
**Durruti: The People Armed**, pp. 135-7]

Thus, for anarchists, a social revolution is a movement from below, of the
oppressed and exploited struggling for their own freedom. Moreover, such a
revolution does not appear as if by magic. Rather, it is the case that
revolutions _"are not improvised. They are not made at will by individuals.
They come about through the force of circumstance and are independent of any
deliberate will or conspiracy."_ [Michael Bakunin, quote by Brian Morris,
**Bakunin: The Philosophy of Freedom**, p. 139] They are, in fact, a product
of social evolution and of social struggle. As Malatesta reminds us:

> _"the oppressed masses . . . have never completely resigned themselves to
oppression and poverty, and who today more than ever than ever show themselves
thirsting for justice, freedom and wellbeing, are beginning to understand that
they will not be able to achieve their emancipation except by union and
solidarity with all the oppressed, with the exploited everywhere in the world.
And they also understand that the indispensable condition for their
emancipation which cannot be neglected is the possession of the means of
production, of the land and of the instruments of labour."_ [**Anarchy**, p.
30]

Thus any social revolution proceeds from the daily struggles of working class
people (just as anarchism does). It is not an event, rather it is a
**process** \-- a process which is occurring at this moment. Thus, for
anarchists, a social revolution is not something in the future but an process
which is occurring in the here and now. As German Anarchist Gustav Landauer
put it:

> _"The State is not something that can be destroyed by a revolution, but it
is a condition, a certain relationship between human beings, a mode of human
behaviour; we destroy it by contracting other relationships, by behaving
differently."_ [quoted by George Woodcock, **Anarchism**, p. 421]

This does not mean that anarchists do not recognise that a revolution will be
marked by, say, insurrectionary events (such as a general strike, wide scale
occupations of land, housing, workplaces, etc., actual insurrections and so
on). Of course not, it means that we place these events in a process, within
social movements and that they do not occur in isolation from history or the
evolution of ideas and movements within society.

Berkman echoes this point when he argued that while _"a social revolution is
one that entirely changes the foundation of society, its political, economic
and social character,"_ such a change _"must **first** take place in the ideas
and opinions of the people, in the minds of men [and women]."_ This means that
_"the social revolution must be prepared. Prepared in these sense of
furthering evolutionary process, of enlightening the people about the evils of
present-day society and convincing them of the desirability and possibility,
of the justice and practicability of a social life based on liberty."_
[Alexander Berkman, **Op. Cit.**, p. 38] And such preparation would be the
result of social struggle in the here and now, social struggle based on direct
action, solidarity and self-managed organisations. While Berkman concentrates
on the labour movement in his classic work, but his comments are applicable to
all social movements:

> _"In the daily struggle of the proletariat such an organisation [a
syndicalist union] would be able to achieve victories about which the
conservative union, as at present built, cannot even dream. . . . Such a union
would soon become something more than a mere defender and protector of the
worker. It would gain a vital realisation of the meaning of unity and
consequent power, of labour solidarity. The factory and shop would serve as a
training camp to develop the worker's understanding of his proper role in
life, to cultivate his [or her] self-reliance and independence, teach him [or
her] mutual help and co-operation, and make him [or her] conscious of his [or
her] responsibility. He will learn to decide and act on his [or her] own
judgement, not leaving it to leaders or politicians to attend to his [or her]
affairs and look out for his [or her] welfare. . . He [or she] will grow to
understand that present economic and social arrangements are wrong and
criminal, and he [or she] will determine to change them. The shop committee
and union will become the field of preparation for a new economic system, for
a new social life."_ [**Op. Cit.**, p. 59]

In other words, the struggle against authority, exploitation, oppression and
domination in the here and now is the start of the social revolution. It is
this daily struggle which creates free people and the organisations it
generates _"bear . . . the living seed of the new society which is to replace
the old one. They are creating not only the ideas, but also the facts of the
future itself."_ [Michael Bakunin, **Bakunin On Anarchism**, p. 255] Hence
Bakunin's comment that anarchists think socialism will be attained only _"by
the development and organisation, not of the political but of the social
organisation (and, by consequence, anti-political) power of the working masses
as much in the towns as in the countryside."_ [**Michael Bakunin: Selected
Writings**, pp. 197-8] Such social power is expressed in economic and
community organisations such as self-managed unions and workplace/community
assemblies (see [section J.5](secJ5.html)).

Anarchists try and follow the example of our Spanish comrades in the C.N.T.
and F.A.I. who, when _"faced with the conventional opposition between
reformism and revolution, they appear, in effect, to have put forward a third
alternative, seeking to obtain immediate practical improvements through the
actual development, in practice, of autonomous, libertarian forms of self-
organisation."_ [Nick Rider, _"The Practice of Direct Action: The Barcelona
Rent Strike of 1931"_, in **For Anarchism**, pp. 79-105, David Goodway (ed.),
p. 99] While doing this, anarchists must also _"beware of ourselves becoming
less anarchist because the masses are not ready for anarchy."_ [Malatesta,
**Life and Ideas**, p. 162]

Therefore, revolution and anarchism is the product of struggle, a social
process in which anarchist ideas spread and develop. However, _"[t]his does
not mean. . . that to achieve anarchy we must wait till **everyone** becomes
an anarchist. On the contrary. . . under present conditions only a small
minority, favoured by specific circumstances, can manage to conceive what
anarchy is. It would be wishful thinking to hope for a general conversion
before a change actually took place in the kind of environment in which
authoritarianism and privilege now flourish. It is precisely for this reason
that [we] . . . need to organise for the bringing about of anarchy, or at any
rate that degree of anarchy which could become gradually feasible, as soon as
a sufficient amount of freedom has been won and a nucleus of anarchists
somewhere exists that is both numerically strong enough and able to be self-
sufficient and to spread its influence locally."_ [Errico Malatesta, **The
Anarchist Revolution**, pp. 83-4]

Thus anarchists influence the struggle, the revolutionary process by
encouraging anarchistic tendencies within those who are not yet anarchists but
are instinctively acting in a libertarian manner. Anarchists spread the
anarchist message to those in struggle and support libertarian tendencies in
it as far as they can. In this way, more and more people will become
anarchists and anarchy will become increasingly possible. We discuss the role
of anarchists in a social revolution in [section J.7.4](secJ7.html#secj74) and
will not do so now.

For anarchists, a social revolution is the end product of years of social
struggle. It is marked by the transformation of a given society and the
breaking down of all forms of oppression and the creation of new ways of
living, new forms of self-managed organisation, a new attitude to live itself.
Moreover, we do not wait for the future to introduce such transformations in
our daily life. Rather, we try and create as much anarchistic tendencies in
today's society as possible in the firm belief that in so doing we are pushing
the creation of a free society nearer.

So anarchists, including revolutionary ones, try to make the world more
libertarian and so bring us closer to freedom. Few anarchists think of anarchy
as something in (or for) the distant future, rather it is something we try and
create in the here and now by living and struggling in a libertarian manner.
Once enough people do this, then a more extensive change towards anarchy (i.e.
a revolution) is inevitable.

## J.7.1 Are all anarchists revolutionaries?

No, far from it. While most anarchists do believe that a social revolution is
required to create a free society, some reject the idea. This is because they
think that revolutions are by their very nature violent and coercive and so
are against anarchist principles. In the words of Proudhon (in reply to Marx):

> _"Perhaps you still hold the opinion that no reform is possible without a
helping **coup de main,** without what used to be called a revolution but
which is quite simply a jolt. I confess that my most recent studies have led
me to abandon this view, which I understand and would willingly discuss, since
for a long time I held it myself. I do not think that this is what we need in
order to succeed, and consequently we must not suggest **revolutionary**
action as the means of social reform because this supposed means would simply
be an appeal to force and to arbitrariness. In brief, it would be a
contradiction."_ [**Selected Writings of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon**, p. 151]

Also they point to the fact that the state is far better armed than the
general population, better trained and (as history proves) more than willing
to slaughter as many people as required to restore "order." In face of this
power, they argue, revolution is doomed to failure.

Those opposed to revolution come from all tendencies of the movement.
Traditionally, Individualist anarchists are usually against the idea of
revolution, as was Proudhon. However, with the failure of the Russian
Revolution and the defeat of the C.N.T.-F.A.I. in Spain, some social
anarchists have rethought support for revolution. Rather than seeing
revolution as the key way of creating a free society they consider it doomed
to failure as the state is too strong a force to be overcome by insurrection.
Instead of revolution, such anarchists support the creation of alternatives,
such as co-operatives, mutual banks and so on, which will help transform
capitalism into libertarian socialism. Such alternative building, combined
with civil disobedience and non-payment of taxes, is seen as the best way to
creating anarchy.

Most revolutionary anarchists agree on the importance of building libertarian
alternatives in the here and now. They would agree with Bakunin when he argued
that such organisations as libertarian unions, co-operatives and so on are
essential _"so that when the Revolution, brought about by the natural force of
circumstances, breaks out, there will be a real force at hand which knows what
to do and by virtue thereof is capable of taking the Revolution into its own
hands and imparting to it a direction salutary for the people: a serious,
international organisation of worker's organisations of all countries, capable
of replacing the departing political world of the States and the
bourgeoisie."_ [**The Political Philosophy of Bakunin**, p. 323] Thus, for
most anarchists, the difference of evolution and revolution is one of little
import -- anarchists should support libertarian tendencies within society as
they support revolutionary situations when they occur.

Moreover, revolutionary anarchists argue that, ultimately, capitalism cannot
be reformed away nor will the state wither away under the onslaught of
libertarian institutions and attitudes. They do not consider it possible to
_"burn Property little by little"_ via _"some system of economics"_ which will
_"put back into society . . . the wealth which has been taken out of society
by another system of economics"_, to use Proudhon's expression. [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 151] Therefore, libertarian tendencies within capitalism may make life
better under that system but they cannot, ultimately, get rid of it. This
implies a social revolution, they argue. Such anarchists agree with Alexander
Berkman when he writes:

> _"This is no record of any government or authority, of any group or class in
power having given up its mastery voluntarily. In every instance it required
the use of force, or at least the threat of it."_ [**ABC of Anarchism**, p.
32]

Even the end of State capitalism ("Communism") in the Eastern Block does not
contradict this argument. Without the mass action of the population, the
regime would have continued. Faced with a massive popular revolt, the
Commissars realised that it was better to renounce power than have it taken
from them. Thus mass rebellion, the start of any true revolution, was
required.

Moreover, the argument that the state is too powerful to be defeated has been
proven wrong time and time again. Every revolution has defeated a military
machine which previously been claimed to be unbeatable. For example, the
people armed is Spain defeated the military in two-thirds of the country.
Ultimately, the power of the state rests on its troops following orders. If
those troops rebel, then the state is powerless. That is why anarchists have
always produced anti-militarist propaganda urging troops to join strikers and
other people in revolt. Revolutionary anarchists, therefore, argue that any
state can be defeated, if the circumstances are right and the work of
anarchists is to encourage those circumstances.

In addition, revolutionary anarchists argue that even if anarchists did not
support revolutionary change, this would not stop such events happening.
Revolutions are the product of developments in human society and occur whether
we desire them or not. They start with small rebellions, small acts of refusal
by individuals, groups, workplaces, communities and grow. These acts of
rebellion are inevitable in any hierarchical society, as is their spreading
wider and wider. Revolutionary anarchists argue that anarchists must, by the
nature of our politics and our desire for freedom, support such acts of
rebellion and, ultimately, social revolution. Not to do so means ignoring
people in struggle against our common enemy and ignoring the means by which
anarchists ideas and attitudes will grow within existing society. Thus
Alexander Berkman is right when he wrote:

> _"That is why it is no prophecy to foresee that some day it must come to
decisive struggle between the masters of life and the dispossessed masses.

>

> "As a matter if fact, that struggle is going on all the time. There is a
continuous warfare between capital and labour. That warfare generally proceeds
within so-called legal forms. But even these erupt now and then in violence,
as during strikes and lockouts, because the armed fist of government is always
at the service of the masters, and that fist gets into action the moment
capital feels its profits threatened: then it drops the mask of 'mutual
interests' and 'partnership' with labour and resorts to the final argument of
every master, to coercion and force.

>

> "It is therefore certain that government and capital will not allow
themselves to be quietly abolished if they can help it; nor will they
miraculously 'disappear' of themselves, as some people pretend to believe. It
will require a revolution to get rid of them."_ [**Op. Cit.**, p. 33]

However, all anarchists are agreed that any revolution should be as non-
violent as possible. Violence is the tool of oppression and, for anarchists,
violence is only legitimate as a means of self-defence against authority.
Therefore revolutionary anarchists do not seek "violent revolution" -- they
are just aware that when people refuse to kow-tow to authority then that
authority will use violence against them. This use of violence has been
directed against non-violent forms of direct action and so those anarchists
who reject revolution will not avoid state violence directed against.

Nor do revolutionary anarchists think that revolution is in contradiction to
the principles of anarchism. As Malatesta put it, _"[f]or two people to live
in peace they must both want peace; if one insists on using force to oblige
the other to work for him and serve him, then the other, if he wishes to
retain his dignity as a man and not be reduced to abject slavery, will be
obliged, in spite of his love of peace, to resist force with adequate means."_
[Malatesta, **Life and Ideas**, p. 54] Under any hierarchical system, those in
authority do not leave those subject to them in peace. The boss does not treat
his/her workers as equals, working together by free agreement without
differences in power. Rather, the boss orders the worker about and uses the
threat of sanctions to get compliance. Similarly with the state. Under these
conditions, revolution cannot be authoritarian -- for it is not authoritarian
to destroy authority! To quote Rudolf Rocker:

> _"We . . . know that a revolution cannot be made with rosewater. And we
know, too, that the owning classes will never yield up their privileges
spontaneously. On the day of victorious revolution the workers will have to
impose their will on the present owners of the soil, of the subsoil and of the
means of production, which cannot be done -- let us be clear on this --
without the workers taking the capital of society into their own hands, and,
above all, without their having demolished the authoritarian structure which
is, and will continue to be, the fortress keeping the masses of the people
under dominion. Such an action is, without doubt, an act of liberation; a
proclamation of social justice; the very essence of social revolution, which
has nothing in common with the utterly bourgeois principle of dictatorship."_
[**Anarchism and Sovietism**]

Errico Malatesta comments reflect well the position of revolutionary
anarchists with regards to the use of force:

> _"We neither seek to impose anything by force nor do we wish to submit to a
violent imposition.

>

> "We intend to use force against government, because it is by force that we
are kept in subjection by government.

>

> "We intend to expropriate the owners of property because it is by force that
they withhold the raw materials and wealth, which is the fruit of human
labour, and use it to oblige others to work in their interest.

>

> "We shall resist with force whoever would wish by force, to retain or regain
the means to impose his will and exploit the labour of others. . .

>

> "With the exception of these cases, in which the use of violence is
justified as a defence against force, we are always against violence, and for
self-determination."_ [**Op. Cit.**, p. 56]

This is the reason why most anarchists are revolutionaries. They do not think
it against the principles of anarchism and consider it the only real means of
creating a free society -- a society in which the far greater, and permanent,
violence which keeps the majority of humanity in servitude can be ended once
and for all.

## J.7.2 Is social revolution possible?

One objection to the possibility of social revolution is based on what we
might call "the paradox of social change." This argument goes as follows:
authoritarian institutions reward and select people with an authoritarian type
of personality for the most influential positions in society; such types of
people have both (a) an interest in perpetuating authoritarian institutions
(from which they benefit) and (b) the power to perpetuate them; hence they
create a self-sustaining and tightly closed system which is virtually
impervious to the influence of non-authoritarian types. Therefore,
institutional change presupposes individual change, which presupposes
institutional change, and so on. Unless it can be shown, then, that
institutions and human psychology can both be changed **at the same time**,
hope for a genuine social revolution (instead of just another rotation of
elites) appears to be unrealistic.

Connected with this problem is the fact that the psychological root of the
hierarchical society is addiction to power -- over other people, over nature,
over the body and human emotions -- and that this addiction is highly
contagious. That is, as soon as any group of people anywhere in the world
becomes addicted to power, those within range of their aggression also feel
compelled to embrace the structures of power, including centralised control
over the use of deadly force, in order to protect themselves from their
neighbours. But once these structures of power are adopted, authoritarian
institutions become self-perpetuating.

In this situation, fear becomes the underlying emotion behind the
conservatism, conformity, and mental inertia of the majority, who in that
state become vulnerable to the self-serving propaganda of authoritarian elites
alleging the necessity of the state, strong leaders, militarism, "law and
order," capitalist bosses, etc. Hence the simultaneous transformation of
institutions and individual psychology becomes even more difficult to imagine.

Serious as these obstacles may be, they do not warrant despair. To see why,
let's note first that "paradigm shifts" in science have not generally derived
from new developments in one field alone but from a convergence of cumulative
developments in several different fields at once. For example, the Einsteinian
revolution which resulted in the overthrow of the Newtonian paradigm was due
to simultaneous progress in mathematics, physics, astronomy and other sciences
that all influenced, reacted on, and cross-fertilised each other (see Thomas
Kuhn, **The Structure of Scientific Revolutions**, 1962). Similarly, if there
is going to be a "paradigm shift" in the social realm, i.e. from hierarchical
to non-hierarchical institutions, it is likely to emerge from the convergence
of a number of different socio-economic and political developments at the same
time. We have discussed these developments in [section J.4](secJ4.html) and so
will not repeat ourselves here. In a hierarchical society, the oppression
which authority produces resistance, and so hope. The _"instinct for freedom"_
cannot be repressed forever.

That is why anarchists stress the importance of direct action and self-help
(see sections [J.2](secJ2.html) and [J.4](secJ4.html)). By the very process of
struggle, by practising self-management, direct action, solidarity people
create the necessary "paradigm shift" in both themselves and society as a
whole. In the words of Malatesta, _"[o]nly freedom or the struggle for freedom
can be the school for freedom."_ [**Life and Ideas**, p. 59] Thus the struggle
against authority is the school of anarchy -- it encourages libertarian
tendencies in society and the transformation of individuals into anarchists.
In a revolutionary situation, this process is accelerated. It is worth quoting
Murray Bookchin at length on this subject:

> _"Revolutions are profoundly educational processes, indeed veritable
cauldrons in which all kinds of conflicting ideas and tendencies are sifted
out in the minds of a revolutionary people. . .

>

> "Individuals who enter into a revolutionary process are by no means the same
after the revolution as they were before it began. Those who encounter a
modicum of success in revolutionary times learn more within a span of a few
weeks or months than they might have learned over their lifetime in non-
revolutionary times. Conventional ideas fall away with extraordinary rapidity;
values and prejudices that were centuries in the making disappear almost
overnight. Strikingly innovative ideas are quickly adopted, tested, and, where
necessary, discarded. Even newer ideas, often flagrantly radical in character,
are adopted with an elan that frightens ruling elites -- however radical the
latter may profess to be -- and they soon become deeply rooted in the popular
consciousness. Authorities hallowed by age-old tradition are suddenly divested
of their prestige, legitimacy, and power to govern. . .

>

> "So tumultuous socially and psychologically are revolutions in general that
they constitute a standing challenge to ideologues, including sociobiologists,
who assert that human behaviour is fixed and human nature predetermined.
Revolutionary changes reveal a remarkable flexibility in 'human nature,' yet
few psychologists have elected to study the social and psychological tumult of
revolution as well as the institutional changes it so often produces. Thus
much must be said with fervent emphasis: **to continue to judge the behaviour
of a people during and after a revolution by the same standards one judged
them by beforehand is completely myopic.**

>

> "I wish to argue [like all anarchists] that the capacity of a revolution to
produce far-reaching ideological and moral changes in a people stems primarily
from the opportunity it affords ordinary, indeed oppressed, people to exercise
popular self-management -- to enter directly, rapidly, and exhilaratingly into
control over most aspects of their social and personal lives. To the extent
that an insurrectionary people takes over the reins of power from the formerly
hallowed elites who oppressed them and begins to restructure society along
radically populist lines, individuals grow aware of latent powers within
themselves that nourish their previously suppressed creativity, sense of self-
worth, and solidarity. They learn that society is neither immutable nor
sanctified, as inflexible custom had previously taught them; rather, it is
malleable and subject, within certain limits, to change according to human
will and desire."_ [**The Third Revolution**, vol. 1, pp. 6-7]

So, social revolutions are possible. Anarchists anticipate successful co-
operation within certain circumstance. People who are in the habit of taking
orders from bosses are not capable of creating a new society. Tendencies
towards freedom, self-management, co-operation and solidarity are not simply
an act of ethical will which overcomes the competitive and hierarchical
behaviour capitalism generates within those who live in it. Capitalism is, as
Malatesta argued, based on competition -- and this includes the working class.
Thus conflict is endemic to working class life under capitalism. However,
**_co-operation**_ is stimulated within our class by our struggles to survive
in and resist the system. This tendency for co-operation generated by struggle
against capitalism also produces the habits required for a free society -- by
struggling to change the world (even a small part of it), people also change
themselves. Direct action produces empowered and self-reliant people who can
manage their own affairs themselves. It is on the liberating effects of
struggle, the tendencies towards individual and collective self-management and
direct action it generates, the needs and feelings for solidarity and creative
solutions to pressing problems it produces that anarchists base their positive
answer on whether social revolution is possible. History has shown that we are
right. It will do so again.

## J.7.3 Doesn't revolution mean violence?

While many try and paint revolutions (and anarchists) as being violent by
their very nature, the social revolution desired by anarchists is essentially
non-violent. This is because, to quote Bakunin, _"[i]n order to launch a
radical revolution, it is . . . necessary to attack positions and things and
to destroy [the institution of] property and the State, but there will be no
need to destroy men and to condemn ourselves to the inevitable reaction which
is unfailingly produced in every society by the slaughter of men."_ [**Michael
Bakunin: Selected Writings**, pp. 168-9]

As Bakunin noted elsewhere, the end of property is also non-violent:

> _"How to smash the tyranny of capital? Destroy capital? But that would be to
destroy all the riches accumulated on earth, all primary materials, all the
instruments of labour, all the means of labour. . . Thus capital cannot and
must not be destroyed. It must be preserved . . . there is but a single
solution -- **the intimate and complete union of capital and labour** . . .
the workers must obtain not individual but **collective** property in capital
. . . the collective property of capital . . . [is] the absolutely necessary
conditions for of the emancipation **of labour and of the workers.**"_ [**The
Basic Bakunin**, pp. 90-1]

The essentially non-violent nature of anarchist ideas of social revolution can
be seen from the Seattle General Strike of 1919. Here is a quote from the
Mayor of Seattle (we do not think we need to say that he was not on the side
of the strikers):

> _"The so-called sympathetic Seattle strike was an attempted revolution. That
there was no violence does not alter the fact . . . The intent, openly and
covertly announced, was for the overthrow of the industrial system; here
first, then everywhere . . . True, there were no flashing guns, no bombs, no
killings. Revolution, I repeat, doesn't need violence. The general strike, as
practised in Seattle, is of itself the weapon of revolution, all the more
dangerous because quiet. To succeed, it must suspend everything; stop the
entire life stream of a community . . . That is to say, it puts the government
out of operation. And that is all there is to revolt -- no matter how
achieved."_ [quoted by Howard Zinn, **A People's History of the United
States**, pp. 370-1]

If the strikers had occupied their workplaces and local communities can
created popular assemblies then the attempted revolution would have become an
actual one without any use of violence at all. This indicates the strength of
ordinary people and the relative weakness of government and capitalism -- they
only work when they can force people to respect them.

In Italy, a year latter, the occupations of the factories and land started. As
Malatesta pointed out, _"in **Umanita Nova** [the daily anarchist newspaper]
we . . . said that if the movement spread to all sectors of industry, that is
workers and peasants followed the example of the metallurgists, of getting rid
of the bosses and taking over the means of production, the revolution would
succeed without shedding a single drop of blood."_ Thus the _"occupation of
the factories and the land suited perfectly our programme of action."_ [**Life
and Ideas**, p. 135]

Therefore the notion that a social revolution is necessarily violent is a
false one. For anarchists, social revolution is essentially an act of self-
liberation (of both the individuals involved and society as a whole). It has
nothing to do with violence, quite the reverse, as anarchists see it as the
means to end the rule and use of violence in society. Therefore anarchists
hope that any revolution is essentially non-violent, with any violence being
defensive in nature.

Of course, many revolutions are marked by violence. However, as Alexander
Berkman argues, this is not the aim of anarchism or the revolution and has far
more to do with previous repression and domination than anarchist ideas:

> _"We know that revolution begins with street disturbances and outbreaks; it
is the initial phase which involves force and violence. But that is merely the
spectacular prologue of the real revolution. The age long misery and indignity
suffered by the masses burst into disorder and tumult, the humiliation and
injustice meekly borne for decades find vents in facts of fury and
destruction. That is inevitable, and it is solely the master class which is
responsible for this preliminary character of revolution. For it is even more
true socially than individually that 'whoever sows the wind will reap the
whirlwind;' the greater the oppression and wretchedness to which the masses
had been made to submit, the fiercer the rage [of] the social storm. All
history proves it . . ."_ [**ABC of Anarchism**, p. 50]

He also argues that _"[m]ost people have very confused notions about
revolution. To them it means just fighting, smashing things, destroying. It is
the same as if rolling up your sleeves for work should be considered the work
itself that you have to do. The fighting bit of the revolution is merely the
rolling up of your sleeves."_ The task of the revolution is the _"destruction
of the existing conditions"_ and _"**conditions** are not destroyed [by]
breaking and smashing things. You can't destroy wage slavery by wrecking the
machinery in the mills and factories . . . You won't destroy government by
setting fire to the White House."_ He correctly points out that to think of
revolution _"in terms of violence and destruction is to misinterpret and
falsify the whole idea of it. In practical application such a conception is
bound to lead to disastrous results."_ [**Op. Cit.**, pp. 40-1]

Thus when anarchists like Bakunin speak of revolution as "destruction" they
mean that the idea of authority and obedience must be destroyed, along with
the institutions that are based on such ideas. We do not mean, as can be
clearly seen, the destruction of people or possessions. Nor do we imply the
glorification of violence -- quite the reserve, as anarchists seek to limit
violence to that required for self-defence against oppression and authority.

Therefore a social revolution **may** involve some violence. It may also mean
no-violence at all. It depends on the revolution and how widely anarchist
ideas are spread. One thing is sure, for anarchists social revolution is
**not** synonymous violence. Indeed, violence usually occurs when the ruling
class resists the action of the oppressed -- that is, when those in authority
act to protect their social position.

The wealthy and their state will do anything in their power to prevent having
a large enough percentage of anarchists in the population to simply "ignore"
the government and property out of existence. If things got that far, the
government would suspend the legal rights, elections and round up influential
subversives. The question is, what do anarchists do in response to these
actions? If anarchists are in the majority or near it, then defensive violence
would likely succeed. For example, _"the people armed"_ crushed the fascist
coup of July 19th, 1936 in Spain and resulted in one of the most important
experiments in anarchism the world has ever seen. This should be contrasted
with the aftermath of the factory occupations in Italy in 1920 and the fascist
terror which crushed the labour movement. In other words, you cannot just
ignore the state even if the majority are acting, you need to abolish it and
organise self-defence against attempts to re-impose it or capitalism.

We discuss the question of self-defence and the protection of the revolution
in [section J.7.6](secJ7.html#secj76).

## J.7.4 What would a social revolution involve?

Social revolution necessitates putting anarchist ideas into daily practice.
Therefore it implies that direct action, solidarity and self-management become
increasingly the dominant form of living in a society. It implies the
transformation of society from top to bottom. We can do no better than quote
Errico Malatesta on what revolution means:

> _"The Revolution is the creation of new living institutions, new groupings,
new social relationships; it is the destruction of privileges and monopolies;
it is the new spirit of justice, of brotherhood, of freedom which must renew
the whole of social life, raise the moral level and the material conditions of
the masses by calling on them to provide, through their direct and conscious
action, for their own futures. Revolution is the organisation of all public
services by those who in them in their own interest as well as the public's;
Revolution is the destruction of all of coercive ties; it is the autonomy of
groups, of communes, of regions; Revolution is the free federation brought
about by a desire for brotherhood, by individual and collective interests, by
the needs of production and defence; Revolution is the constitution of
innumerable free groupings based on ideas, wishes, and tastes of all kinds
that exist among the people; Revolution is the forming and disbanding of
thousands of representative, district, communal, regional, national bodies
which, without having any legislative power, serve to make known and to co-
ordinate the desires and interests of people near and far and which act
through information, advice and example. Revolution is freedom proved in the
crucible of facts -- and lasts so long as freedom lasts. . ."_ [**Life and
Ideas**, p. 153]

This, of course, presents a somewhat wide vision of the revolutionary process.
We will need to give some more concrete examples of what a social revolution
would involve. However, before so doing, we stress that these are purely
examples drawn from previous revolutions and are not written in stone. Every
revolution creates its own forms of organisation and struggle. The next one
will be no different. Just as we argued in [section I](secIcon.html), an
anarchist revolution will create its own forms of freedom, forms which may
share aspects with previous forms but which are unique to themselves. All we
do here is give a rough overview of what we expect (based on previous
revolutions) to see occur in a social revolution. We are not predicting the
future. As Kropotkin put it:

> _"A question which we are often asked is: 'How will you organise the future
society on Anarchist principles?' If the question were put to . . . someone
who fancies that a group of men [or women] is able to organise society as they
like, it would seem natural. But in the ears of an Anarchist, it sounds very
strangely, and the only answer we can give to it is: 'We cannot organise you.
It will depend upon **you** what sort of organisation you choose.'"_ [**Act
for Yourselves**, p. 32]

And organise themselves they have. In each social revolution, the oppressed
have organised themselves into many different self-managed organisations.
These bodies include the Sections during the Great French Revolution, the
workers councils ("soviets" or "rate") during the Russian and German
revolutions, the industrial and rural collectives during the Spanish
Revolution, the workers councils during the Hungarian revolution of 1956,
assemblies and action committees during the 1968 revolt in France, and so on.
These bodies were hardly uniform in nature and some were more anarchistic than
others, but the tendency towards self-management and federation existing in
them all. This tendency towards anarchistic solutions and organisation is not
unsurprising, for, as Nestor Makhno argued, _"[i]n carrying through the
revolution, under the impulsion of the anarchism that is innate in them, the
masses of humanity search for free associations. Free assemblies always
command their sympathy. The revolutionary anarchist must help them to
formulate this approach as best they can."_ [**The Struggle Against the State
and Other Essays**, p. 85]

In addition, we must stress that we are discussing an **anarchist** social
revolution in this section. As we noted in [section I.2.2](secI2.html#seci22),
anarchists recognise that any revolution will take on different forms in
different areas and develop in different ways and at different speeds. We
leave it up to others to describe their vision of revolution (for Marxists,
the creation of a "workers' state" and the seizure of power by the
"proletarian" vanguard or party, and so on).

So what would a libertarian social revolution involve? Firstly, a revolution
_"it is not the work of one day. It means a whole period, mostly lasting for
several years, during which the country is in a state of effervescence; when
thousands of formerly indifferent spectators take a lively part in public
affairs . . [and] criticises and repudiates the institutions which are a
hindrance to free development; when it boldly enters upon problems which
formerly seemed insoluble."_ [Peter Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 25-6] Thus,
it would be a **process** in which revolutionary attitudes, ideas, actions and
organisations spread in society until the existing system is overthrown and a
new one takes its place. It does not come overnight. Rather it is an
accumulative development, marked by specific events of course, but
fundamentally it goes on in the fabric of society. For example, the **real**
Russian revolution went on during the period between the 1917 February and
October insurrections when workers took over their workplaces, peasants seized
their land and new forms of social life (soviets, factory committees, co-
operatives, etc.) were formed and people lost their previous submissive
attitudes to authority by using direct action to change their lives for the
better (see **The Unknown Revolution** by Voline for more details and evidence
of this revolutionary process in action). Similarly, the Spanish Revolution
occurred after the 19th of July, 1936, when workers again took over their
workplaces, peasants formed collectives and militias were organised to fight
fascism (see **Collectives in the Spanish Revolution** by Gaston Leval for
details).

Secondly, _"there **must** be a rapid modification of outgrown economical and
political institutions, an overthrow of the injustices accumulated by
centuries past, a displacement of wealth and political power."_ [**Op. Cit.**,
p. 25]

This aspect is the key one. Without the abolition of the state and capitalism,
not real revolution has taken place. As Bakunin argued, _"the program of
social revolution"_ is _"the abolition of all exploitation and all political
or juridical as well as governmental and bureaucratic oppression, in other
words, to the abolition of all classes through the equalisation of economic
conditions, and the abolition of their last buttress, the state."_ That is,
_"the total and definitive liberation of the proletariat from economic
exploitation and state oppression."_ [**Statism and Anarchy**, pp. 48-9]

We should stress here that, regardless of what Marxists may say, anarchists
see the destruction of capitalism occurring **at the same time as** the
destruction of the state. We do not aim to abolish the state first, then
capitalism as Engels asserted we did. This perspective of a simultaneous
political and economic revolution is clearly seen when Bakunin wrote that a
city in revolt would _"naturally make haste to organise itself as best it can,
in revolutionary style, after the workers have joined into associations and
made a clean sweep of all the instruments of labour and every kind of capital
and building; armed and organised by streets and **quartiers,** they will form
the revolutionary federation of all the **quartiers,** the federative commune.
. . All . . .the revolutionary communes will then send representatives to
organise the necessary services and arrangements for production and exchange .
. . and to organise common defence against the enemies of the Revolution."_
[**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 179]

As can be seen from Bakunin's comments just quoted that an essential part of a
social revolution is the _"expropriation of landowners and capitalists for the
benefit of all."_ This would be done by workers occupying their workplaces and
placing them under workers' self-management. Individual self-managed
workplaces would then federate on a local and industrial basis into workers'
councils to co-ordinate joint activity, discuss common interests and issues as
well as ensuring common ownership and universalising self-management. _"We
must push the workers to take possession of the factories, to federate among
themselves and work for the community, and similarly the peasants should take
over the land and the produce usurped by the landlords, and come to an
agreement with the industrial workers on the necessary exchange of goods."_
[Errico Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, p. 198 and p. 165]

In this way capitalism is replaced by new economic system based on self-
managed work. The end of hierarchy in the economy, in other words. These
workplace assemblies and local, regional, etc., federations would start to
organise production to meet human needs rather than capitalist profit. While
most anarchists would like to see the introduction of communistic relations
begin as quickly as possible in such an economy, most are realistic enough to
recognise that tendencies towards libertarian communism will be depend on
local conditions. As Malatesta argued:

> _"It is then that graduation really comes into operation. We shall have to
study all the practical problems of life: production, exchange, the means of
communication, relations between anarchist groupings and those living under
some kind of authority, between communist collectives and those living in an
individualistic way; relations between town and country, the utilisation for
the benefit of everyone of all natural resources of the different regions [and
so on] . . . And in every problem [anarchists] should prefer the solutions
which not only are economically superior but which satisfy the need for
justice and freedom and leave the way open for future improvements, which
other solutions might not."_ [**Op. Cit.**, p. 173]

No central government could organise such a transformation. No centralised
body could comprehend the changes required and decide between the
possibilities available to those involved. Hence the very complexity of life,
and the needs of social living, will push a social revolution towards
anarchism. _"Unavoidably,"_ argued Kropotkin, _"the Anarchist system of
organisation -- free local action and free grouping -- will come into play."_
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 72] Without this local action and the free agreement between
local groups to co-ordinate activity, a revolution would be dead in the water
and fit only to produce a new bureaucratic class structure, as the experience
of the Russian Revolution proves. Unless the economy is transformed from the
bottom up by those who work within it, socialism is impossible. If it is re-
organised from the top-down by a centralised body all that will be achieved is
state capitalism and rule by bureaucrats instead of capitalists.

Therefore, the key economic aspect of a social revolution is the end of
capitalist oppression by the direct action of the workers themselves and their
re-organisation of their work and the economy by their own actions,
organisations and initiative from the bottom-up. As Malatesta argued:

> _"To destroy radically this oppression without any danger of it re-emerging,
all people must be convinced of their right to the means of production, and be
prepared to exercise this basic right by expropriating the landowners, the
industrialists and financiers, and putting all social wealth at the disposal
of the people."_ [**Op. Cit.**, p. 167]

However, the economic transformation is but part of the picture. As Kropotkin
argued, _"throughout history we see that each change in the economic relations
of a community is accompanied by a corresponding change in what may be called
political organisation . . . Thus, too, it will be with Socialism. If it
contemplates a new departure in economics it **must** be prepared for a new
departure in what is called political organisation."_ [**Op. Cit.**, p. 39]
Thus the anarchist social revolution also aims to abolish the state and create
a confederation of self-governing communes to ensure its final elimination. To
really destroy something you must replace it with something better. Hence
anarchism will destroy the state by a confederation of self-managed, free
communities (or communes).

This destruction of the state is essential. This is because _"those workers
who want to free themselves, or even only to effectively improve their
conditions, will be forced to defend themselves from the government . . .
which by legalising the right to property and protecting it with brute force,
constitutes a barrier to human progress, which must be beaten down . . . if
one does not wish to remain indefinitely under present conditions or even
worse."_ Therefore, _"[f]rom the economic struggle one must pass to the
political struggle, that is to the struggle against government."_ [Malatesta,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 195]

Thus a social revolution will have to destroy the state bureaucracy and the
states forces of violence and coercion (the police, armed forces, intelligence
agencies, and so on). If this is not done then the state will come back and
crush the revolution. Such a destruction of the state does not involve
violence against individuals, but rather the end of hierarchical
organisations, positions and institutions. It would involve, for example, the
disbanding of the police, army, navy, state officialdom etc. and the
transformation of police stations, army and naval bases, state bureaucracy's
offices into something more useful (or, as in the case of prisons, their
destruction). Town halls would be occupied and used by community and
industrial groups, for example. Mayors' offices could be turned into creches,
for example. Police stations, if they have not been destroyed, could, perhaps,
be turned into storage centres for goods. In William Morris' utopian novel,
**News from Nowhere**, the Houses of Parliament were turned into a manure
storage facility. And so on. Those who used to work in such occupations would
be asked to pursue a more fruitful way of life or leave the community. In this
way, all harmful and useless institutions would be destroyed or transformed
into something useful and of benefit to society.

In addition, as well as the transformation/destruction of the buildings
associated with the old state, the decision making process for the community
previously usurped by the state would come back into the hands of the people.
Alternative, self-managed organisations would be created in every community to
manage community affairs. From these community assemblies, confederations
would spring up to co-ordinate joint activities and interests. These
neighbourhood assemblies and confederations would be means by which power
would be dissolved in society and government finally eliminated in favour of
freedom (both individual and collective).

Ultimately, anarchism means creating positive alternatives to existing
institutions which provide some useful function. For example, we propose self-
management as an alternative to capitalist production. We propose self-
governing communes to organise social life instead of the state. _"One only
destroys, and effectively and permanently,"_ argued Malatesta, _"that which
one replaces by something else; and to put off to a later date the solution of
problems which present themselves with the urgency of necessity, would be to
give time to the institutions one is intending to abolish to recover from the
shock and reassert themselves, perhaps under other names, but certainly with
the same structure."_ [**Op. Cit.**, p. 159] This was the failure of the
Spanish Revolution, which ignored the state rather than abolish it via new,
self-managed organisations (see [ section I.8](secI8.html)).

Hence a social revolution would see the _"[o]rganisation of social life by
means of free association and federations of producers and consumers, created
and modified according to the wishes of their members, guided by science and
experience, and free from any kind of imposition which does not spring from
natural needs, to which everyone, convinced by a feeling of overriding
necessity, voluntarily submits."_ [Errico Malatesta, **Life and Ideas**, p.
184]

These organisations, we must stress, are usually products of the revolution
and the revolutionary process itself:

> _"Assembly and community must arise from within the revolutionary process
itself; indeed, the revolutionary process must **be** the formation of
assembly and community, and with it, the destruction of power. Assembly and
community must become 'fighting words,' not distinct panaceas. They must be
created as **modes of struggle** against existing society . . . The future
assemblies of people in the block, the neighbourhood or the district -- the
revolutionary sections to come -- will stand on a higher social level than all
the present-day committees, syndicates, parties and clubs adorned by the most
resounding 'revolutionary' titles. They will be the living nuclei of utopia in
the decomposing body of bourgeois society"_ In this way, the _"specific
gravity of society . . . [will] be shifted to its base -- the armed people in
permanent assembly."_ [**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, pp. 167-8 and pp. 168-9]

Such organisations are required because, in the words of Murray Bookchin,
_"[f]reedom has its forms . . . a liberatory revolution always poses the
question of what social forms will replace existing ones. At one point or
another, a revolutionary people must deal with how it will manage the land and
the factories from which it requires the means of life. It must deal with the
manner in which it will arrive at decisions that affect the community as a
whole. Thus if revolutionary thought is to be taken at all seriously, it must
speak directly to the problems and forms of social management."_ [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 143] If this is not done, capitalism and the state will not be
destroyed and the social revolution will fail. Only be destroying hierarchical
power by abolishing state and capitalism by self-managed organisations can
individuals free themselves and society.

As well as these economic and political changes, there would be other changes
as well -- far too many to chronicle here. For example, _"[w]e will see to it
that all empty and under-occupied houses are used so that no one will be
without a roof over his [or her] head. We will hasten to abolish banks and
title deeds and all that represents and guarantees the power of the State and
capitalist privilege. And we will try to reorganise things in such a way that
it will be impossible for bourgeois society to be reconstituted."_ [Malatesta,
**Op. Cit.**, p. 165] Similarly, free associations will spring up on a whole
range of issues and for a whole range of interests and needs. Social life will
become transformed, as will many aspects of personal life and personal
relationships. We cannot say in which way, bar there will be a general
libertarian movement in all aspects of life as women resist and overcome
sexism, gays resist and end homophobia, the young will expect to be treated as
individuals, not property, and so on.

Society will become more diverse, open, free and libertarian in nature. And,
hopefully, it and the struggle that creates it will be **fun** \-- anarchism
is about making life worth living and so any struggle must reflect that. The
use of fun in the struggle is important. There is no incongruity in conducting
serious business and having fun. We are sure this will piss off the "serious"
Left no end. The aim of revolution is to emancipate **individuals** not
abstractions like "the proletariat," "society," "history" and so on. And
having fun is part and parcel of that liberation. As Emma Goldman said, _"If I
can't dance, it's not my revolution."_ Revolutions should be **_"festivals of
the oppressed"_** \-- we cannot _"resolve the anarchic, intoxicating phase
that opens all the great revolutions of history merely into an expression of
class interest and the opportunity to redistribute social wealth."_ [Murray
Bookchin, **Op. Cit.**, p. 277f]

Therefore a social revolution involves a transformation of society from the
bottom up by the creative action of working class people. This transformation
would be conducted through self-managed organisations which will be the basis
for abolishing hierarchy, state and capitalism. _"There can be no separation
of the revolutionary process from the revolutionary goal. **A society based on
self-administration must be achieved by means of self-administration.** . . .
If we define 'power' as the power of man over man, power can only be destroyed
by the very process in which man acquires power over his own life and in which
he not only 'discovers' himself, but, more meaningfully, formulates his
selfhood in all its social dimensions."_ [Murray Bookchin, **Op. Cit.**, p.
167]

## J.7.5 What is the role of anarchists in a social revolution?

All the great social revolutions have been spontaneous. Indeed, it is cliche
that the revolutionaries are usually the most surprised when a revolution
breaks out. Nor do anarchists assume that a revolution will initially be
libertarian in nature. All we assume is that there will be libertarian
tendencies which anarchists are work within and try and strengthen. Therefore
the role of anarchists and anarchist organisations is to try and push a
revolution towards a social revolution by encouraging the tendencies we
discussed in the [last section](secJ77.html#secj74) and by arguing for
anarchist ideas and solutions. In the words of Vernon Richards:

> _"We do not for one moment assume that all social revolutions are
necessarily anarchist. But whatever form the revolution against authority
takes, the role of anarchists is clear: that of inciting the people to abolish
capitalistic property and the institutions through which it exercises its
power for the exploitation of the majority by a minority."_ [**Lessons of the
Spanish Revolution**, p. 44]

For anarchists, their role in a social revolution is clear. They try to spread
anarchist ideas and encourage autonomous organisation and activity by the
oppressed. For example, during the Russian Revolution anarchists and anarcho-
syndicalists played a key role in the factory committee movement for workers'
self-management. They combated Bolshevik attempts to substitute state control
for workers' self-management and encouraged workplace occupations and
federations of factory committees (see Maurice Brinton's **The Bolsheviks and
Workers' Control** for a good introduction to the movement for workers' self-
management during the Russian Revolution and Bolshevik hostility to it).
Similarly, they supported the soviets (councils elected by workers in their
workplaces) but opposed their transformation from revolutionary bodies into
state organs (and so little more than organs of the Communist Party and so the
enemies of self-management). The anarchists tried to _"work for their
conversion from centres of authority and decrees into non-authoritarian
centres, regulating and keeping things in order but not suppressing the
freedom and independence of local workers' organisations. They must become
centres which link together these autonomous organisations."_ [G. P. Maksimov
in Paul Avrich (ed.) **The Anarchists in the Russian Revolution**, p. 105]

Therefore, the anarchist role, as Murray Bookchin puts it, is to _"preserve
and extend the anarchic phase that opens all the great social revolutions"_ by
working _"**within the framework of the forms created by the revolution,** not
within the forms created by the party. What this means is that their
commitment is to the revolutionary organs of self-management . . . to the
**social** forms, not the **political** forms. Anarcho-communists [and other
revolutionary anarchists] seek to persuade the factory committees, assemblies
or soviets to make themselves into **genuine organs of popular self-
management,** not to dominate them, manipulate them, or hitch them to an all-
knowing political party."_ [**Post-Scarcity Anarchism**, p. 215 and p. 217]

Equally as important, _"is that the people, all people, should lose their
sheeplike instincts and habits with which their minds have been inculcated by
an age-long slavery, and that they should learn to think and act freely. It is
to this great task of spiritual liberation that anarchists must especially
devote their attention."_ [Malatesta, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 160-1] Unless people
think and act for themselves, no social revolution is possible and anarchy
will remain just a tendency with authoritarian societies.

Practically, this means the encouragement of self-management and direct
action. Anarchists thus _"push the people to expropriate the bosses and put
all goods in common and organise their daily lives themselves, through freely
constituted associations, without waiting for orders from outside and refusing
to nominate or recognise any government or constituted body in whatever guise
. . . even in a provisional capacity, which ascribes to itself the right to
lay down the law and impose with force its will on others."_ [Malatesta, **Op.
Cit.**, p. 197] This is because, to quote Bakunin, anarchists do _"not accept,
even in the process of revolutionary transition, either constituent
assemblies, provisional governments or so-called revolutionary dictatorships;
because we are convinced that revolution is only sincere, honest and real in
the hands of the masses, and that when it is concentrated in those of a few
ruling individuals it inevitably and immediately becomes reaction."_
[**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 237]

As the history of every revolution shows, _"revolutionary government"_ is a
contradiction in terms. Government bodies mean _"the transferring of
initiative from the armed workers to a central body with executive powers. By
removing the initiative from the workers, the responsibility for the conduct
of the struggle and its objectives [are] also transferred to a governing
hierarchy, and this could have no other than an adverse effect on the morale
of the revolutionary fighters."_ [Vernon Richards, **Lessons of the Spanish
Revolution**, pp. 42-3] Such a centralisation of power means the suppression
of local initiatives, the replacing of self-management with bureaucracy and
the creation of a new, exploitative and oppressive class of officials and
party hacks. Only when power rests in the hands of everyone can a social
revolution exist and a free society created. If this is not done, if the state
replaces the self-managed associations of a free people, all that happens is
the replacement of one class system by another. This is because the state is
an instrument of minority rule -- it can never become an instrument of
majority rule, its centralised, hierarchical and authoritarian nature excludes
such a possibility (see [section H.3.7](secH3.html#sech37) for more discussion
on this issue).

Therefore an important role of anarchists is to undermine hierarchical
organisation by creating self-managed ones, by keeping the management and
direction of a struggle or revolution in the hands of those actually
conducting it. It is **their** revolution, **not** a party's and so they
should control and manage it. They are the ones who have to live with the
consequences of it. _"The revolution is safe, it grows and becomes strong,"_
correctly argues Alexander Berkman, _"as long as the masses feel that they are
direct participants in it, that they are fashioning their own lives, that
**they** are making the revolution, that they **are** the revolution. But the
moment that their activities are usurped by a political party or are centred
in some special organisation, revolutionary effort becomes limited to a
comparatively small circle from the which the large masses are practically
excluded. The natural result of that [is that] popular enthusiasm is dampened,
interest gradually weakens, initiative languishes, creativeness wanes, and the
revolution becomes the monopoly of a clique which presently turns dictator."_
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 65]

The history of every revolution proves this point, we feel, and so the role of
anarchists (like those described in [section J.3](secJ3.html)) is clear -- to
keep a revolution revolutionary by encouraging libertarian ideas,
organisation, tactics and activity. To requote Emma Goldman:

> _"No revolution can ever succeed as factor of liberation unless the MEANS
used to further it be identical in spirit and tendency with the PURPOSE to be
achieved."_ [**Patterns of Anarchy**, p. 113]

Anarchists, therefore, aim to keep the means in line with the goal and their
role in any social revolution is to combat authoritarian tendencies and
parties while encouraging working class self-organisation, self-activity and
self-management and the spreading of libertarian ideas and values within
society.

## J.7.6 How could an anarchist revolution defend itself?

To some, particularly Marxists, this section may seem in contradiction with
anarchist ideas. After all, did Marx not argue in a diatribe against Proudhon
that anarchist _"abolishing the state"_ implies the _"laying down of arms"_ by
the working class? However, as will become very clear nothing could be further
from the truth. Anarchists have always argued for defending a revolution -- by
force, if necessary. Anarchists do not think that abolishing the state
involves _"laying down arms."_ We argue that Marx (and Marxists) confuse self-
defence by _"the people armed"_ with the state, a confusion which has horrific
implications (as the history of the Russian Revolution shows -- see the
appendix on ["What happened during the Russian Revolution?"](append41.html)
for details).

So how would an anarchist revolution (and by implication, society) defend
itself? Firstly, we should note that it will **not** defend itself by creating
a centralised body, a new state. If it did this then the revolution will have
failed and a new class society would have been created (a society based on
state bureaucrats and oppressed workers as in the Soviet Union). Thus we
reject Marx's notion of _"a revolutionary and transitory form"_ of state as
confused in the extreme. [Marx quoted by Lenin, **Essential Works of Lenin**,
p. 315] Rather, we seek libertarian means to defend a libertarian revolution.
What would these libertarian means be?

History, as well as theory, points to them. In all the major revolutions of
this century which anarchists took part in they formed militias to defend
freedom. For example, anarchists in many Russian cities formed "Black Guards"
to defend their expropriated houses and revolutionary freedoms. In the
Ukraine, Nestor Makhno helped organise a peasant-worker army to defend the
social revolution against authoritarians of right and left. In the Spanish
Revolution, the C.N.T. and F.A.I. organised militias to free those parts of
Spain under fascist rule after the military coup in 1936.

(As an aside, we **must** point out that these militias had nothing in common
-- bar the name -- with the present "militia movement" in the United States.
The anarchist militias were organised in a libertarian manner and aimed to
defend an anti-statist, anti-capitalist revolution from pro-state, pro-
capitalist forces. In contrast, the US "militia movement" is organised in a
military fashion, defend property rights and want to create their own
governments.)

These anarchist militias were as self-managed as possible, with any "officers"
elected and accountable to the troops and having the same pay and living
conditions as them. Nor did they impose their ideas on others. When a militia
liberated a village, town or city they called upon the population to organise
their own affairs, as they saw fit. All the militia did was present
suggestions and ideas to the population. For example, when the Makhnovists
passed through a district they would put on posters announcing:

> _"The freedom of the workers and the peasants is their own, and not subject
to any restriction. It is up to the workers and peasants to act, to organise
themselves, to agree among themselves in all aspects of their lives, as they
themselves see fit and desire. . . The Makhnovists can do no more than give
aid and counsel . . . In no circumstances can they, nor do they wish to,
govern."_ [quoted by Peter Marshall, **Demanding the Impossible**, p. 473]

Needless to say, the Makhnovists counselled the workers and peasants _"to set
up free peasants' and workers' councils"_ as well as to expropriate the land
and means of production. They argued that _"[f]reedom of speech, of the press
and of assembly is the right of every toiler and any gesture contrary to that
freedom constitutes an act of counter-revolution."_ [**No Gods, No Masters**,
vol. 2, pp. 157-8] The Makhnovists also organised regional congresses of
peasants and workers to discuss revolutionary and social issues (a fact that
annoyed the Bolsheviks, leading to Trotsky trying to ban one congress and
arguing that _"participation in said congress will be regarded as an act of
high treason."_ [**Op. Cit.**, p. 151] Little wonder workers' democracy
withered under the Bolsheviks!).

The Makhnovists declared principles were voluntary enlistment, the election of
officers and self-discipline according to the rules adopted by each unit
themselves. Remarkably effective, the Makhnovists were the force that defeated
Denikin's army and helped defeat Wrangel. After the Whites were defeated, the
Bolsheviks turned against the Makhnovists and betrayed them. However, while
they existed the Makhnovists defended the freedom of the working class to
organise themselves against both right and left statists. See Voline's **The
Unknown Revolution** and Peter Arshinov's **History of the Makhnovist
Movement** for more information or the appendix on ["Why does the Makhnovist
movement show there is an alternative to Bolshevism?"](append46.html) of this
FAQ.

A similar situation developed in Spain. After defeating the military/fascist
coup on 19th of July, 1936, the anarchists organised self-managed militias to
liberate those parts of Spain under Franco. These groups were organised in a
libertarian fashion from the bottom up:

> _"The establishment of war committees is acceptable to all confederal
militias. We start from the individual and form groups of ten, which come to
accommodations among themselves for small-scale operations. Ten such groups
together make up one **centuria,** which appoints a delegate to represent it.
Thirty **centurias** make up one column, which is directed by a war committee,
on which the delegates from the **centurias** have their say. . . although
every column retains its freedom of action, we arrive at co-ordination of
forces, which is not the same thing as unity of command."_ [**No Gods, No
Masters**, vol. 2, pp. 256-7]

Like the Makhnovists, the anarchist militias in Spain were not only fighting
against reaction, they were fighting for a better world. As Durruti argued,
_"Our comrades on the front know for whom and for what they fight. They feel
themselves revolutionaries and they fight, not in defence of more or less
promised new laws, but for the conquest of the world, of the factories, the
workshops, the means of transportation, their bread and the new culture."_
[**Op. Cit.**, p. 248]

When they liberated towns and villages, the militia columns urged workers and
peasants to collectivise the land and means of production, to re-organise life
in a libertarian fashion. All across anti-Fascist Spain workers and peasants
did exactly that (see [section I.8](secI8.html) for more information). The
militias only defended the workers' and peasants' freedom to organise their
own lives as they saw fit and did not force them to create collectives or
dictate their form.

Unfortunately, like the Makhnovists, the C.N.T. militias were betrayed by
their so-called allies on the left. The anarchist troops were not given enough
arms and were left on the front to rot in inaction. The "unified" command by
the Republican State preferred not to arm libertarian troops as they would use
these arms to defend themselves and their fellow workers against the
Republican and Communist led counter-revolution. Ultimately, the _"people in
arms"_ won the revolution and the "People's army" which replaced it lost the
war. See Abel Paz's **Durruti: The People Armed**, Vernon Richards **Lessons
of the Spanish Revolution** and George Orwell's **Homage to Catalonia** for
more information.

While the cynic may point out that, in the end, these revolutions and militias
were defeated, it does not mean that their struggle was in vain or a future
revolution will not succeed. That would be like arguing in 1940 that democracy
is inferior to fascism because the majority of democratic states had been
(temporarily) defeated by fascism or fascist states. It does not mean that
these methods will fail in the future or that we should embrace apparently
more "successful" approaches which end in the creation of a society the total
opposite of what we desire (means determine ends, after all, and statist means
will create statist ends and apparent "successes" -- like Bolshevism -- are
the greatest of failures in terms of our ideas and ideals). All we are doing
here is pointing how anarchists have defended revolutions in the past and that
these methods were successful for a long time in face of tremendous opposition
forces.

Thus, in practice, anarchists have followed Malatesta's argument for the
_"creation of a voluntary militia, without powers to interfere as militia in
the life of the community, but only to deal with any armed attacks by the
forces of reaction to re-establish themselves, or to resist outside
intervention by countries as yet not in a state of revolution."_ [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 166] This militia would be based on an armed population and _"[t]he
power of the people in arms can only be used in the defence of the revolution
and the freedoms won by their militancy and their sacrifices."_ [Vernon
Richards, **Lessons of the Spanish Revolution**, p. 44] It does not seek to
impose a revolution, for you cannot impose freedom or force people to be free
against their will.

Hence anarchists would seek to defend a revolution because, while anarchism
_"is opposed to any interference with your liberty . . . [and] against all
invasion and violence"_ it recognises that when _"any one attacks **you**,
then it is **he** who is invading you, he who is employing violence against
you. You have a right to defend yourself. More than that, it is your duty, as
an anarchist to protect your liberty, to resist coercion and compulsion. . .
In other words, the social revolution will attack no one, but it will defend
itself against invasion from any quarter."_ [Alexander Berkman, **ABC of
Anarchism**, p. 81]

As Berkman stresses, this revolutionary defence _"must be in consonance with
th[e] spirit [of anarchism]. Self-defence excludes all acts of coercion, of
persecution or revenge. It is concerned only with repelling attack and
depriving the enemy of opportunity to invade you."_ Any defence would be based
on _"the strength of the revolution . . . First and foremost, in the support
of the people . . . If they feel that they themselves are making the
revolution, that they have become masters of their lives, that they have
gained freedom and are building up their welfare, then in that very sentiment
you have the greatest strength of the revolution. . . Let them believe in the
revolution, and they will defend it to the death."_ Thus the _"armed workers
and peasants are the only effective defence of the revolution."_ [**Op.
Cit.**, pp. 81-81]

Part of this strength lies in liberty, so no attempt would be made to "defend"
the revolution against mere talk, against the mere expression of an opinion.
To _"suppress speech and press is not only a theoretical offence against
liberty; it is a direct blow at the very foundations of the revolution. . . It
would generate fear and distrust, would hatch conspiracies, and culminate in a
reign of terror which has always killed revolution in the pass."_ [**Op.
Cit.**, p. 83]

Moreover, in the case of foreign intervention, the importance of international
solidarity is important. As Bakunin argued, _"a social revolution cannot be a
revolution in one nation alone. It is by nature an international revolution."_
[**Michael Bakunin: Selected Writings**, p. 49] Thus any foreign intervention
would face the problems of solidarity actions and revolts on its own doorstep
and not dare send its troops abroad for long, if at all. Ultimately, the only
way to support a revolution is to make your own.

Within the revolutionary area, it is the actions of liberated people than will
defend it. Firstly, the population would be armed and so counter-
revolutionaries would face stiff opposition to their attempts to recreate
authority. Secondly, they would face liberated individuals who would reject
their attempts:

> _"The only way in which a state of Anarchy can be obtained is for each man
[or woman] who is oppressed to act as if he [or she] were at liberty, in
defiance of all authority to the contrary . . . In practical fact, territorial
extension is necessary to ensure permanency to any given individual
revolution. In speaking of the Revolution, we signify the aggregate of so many
successful individual and group revolts as will enable every person within the
revolutionised territory to act in perfect freedom . . . without having to
constantly dread the prevention or the vengeance of an opposing power
upholding the former system . . . Under these circumstance it is obvious that
any visible reprisal could and would be met by a resumption of the same
revolutionary action on the part of the individuals or groups affected, and
that the **maintenance** of a state of Anarchy in this manner would be far
easier than the gaining of a state of Anarchy by the same methods and in the
face of hitherto unshaken opposition."_ [Kropotkin, **Op. Cit.**, pp. 87-8]

Thus any authoritarian would face the direct action of a free people, of free
individuals, who would refuse to co-operate with the would-be authorities and
join in solidarity with their friends and fellow workers to resist them. The
only way a counter-revolution could spread internally is if the mass of the
population can become alienated from the revolution and this is impossible in
an anarchist revolution as power remains in their hands. If power rests in
their hands, there is no danger from counter-revolutionaries.

In the end, an anarchist revolution can be defended only by applying its ideas
as widely as possible. Its defence rests in those who make it. If the
revolution is an expression of their needs, desires and hopes then it will be
defended with the full passion of a free people. Such a revolution **may** be
defeated by superior force, who can tell? But the possibility is that it will
not and that is what makes it worth trying. To not act because of the
possibility of failure is to live half a life. Anarchism calls upon everyone
to live the kind of life they deserve as unique individuals and desire as
human beings. Individually we can make a difference, together we can change
the world.

